---
title: 2014 IMBES Meeting (Part 2) - Pedagogy and Neuroscience
categories: education neuroscience
---
The second session I attended was the session entitled "Pedagogy & Neuroscience." Based on the title alone, it seems like something not that informative since it is a "Mind, Brain, and Education" symposium. However, the title stems from specific examples that the speakers discussed. In general, I did not find this session personally very informative or interesting, but I will try to do my best to share what I learned or what objectives were trying to be put across.

The first speaker was Reuven Babai from Tel Aviv University in Israel (link to his site not working at time of blog post). He discussed the presence of "interference" that prevent students from answering questions correctly even when they have the tools to address it. He gave the example of questions asking to determine which shapes have the larger perimeter and the apparent difference of area can serve as an interfering variable. He says that they can stimulate a part of the brain using [tDCS (transcranial direct current stimulation)](https://www.hopkinsmedicine.org/psychiatry/specialty_areas/brain_stimulation/tdcs.html) to stimulate inhibitory pathways which can overcome such interference. Personally, this does not seem like a practical application. He presented a more practical alternative which is to simply warn the students in directions about possibly misconstruing the relationship of perimeter and area. However, I would think such a warning would defeat the purpose of learning, perhaps even denying the opportunity to learn through mistakes which can be important for metacognitive processes.

The second speaker was [Laurie Cutting](https://peabody.vanderbilt.edu/bio/laurie-cutting) from Vanderbilt who is interested in longitudinal brain development, akin to [Terry Jernigan's](http://profiles.ucsd.edu/terry.jernigan) work at UCSD. She poses the interesting question of whether studying brains can predict behavior better than looking at the behavior itself. She looked at gender differences in processing language or visuo-spatial information. Apparently, some behaviors may be the same between genders, but the mechanisms may be different.

