---
title: 2014 IMBES Meeting (Part 1) - Discussion on Math Anxiety
categories: education neuroscience
---

I had the good fortunate to be invited by Doris Alvarez, who serves as Director of The Educator Network, to this year's International Mind, Brain, and Education Society (IMBES) meeting. (The Educator Network is part of UCSD's Temporal Dynamics of Learning Center, to which I am also affiliated.)

I was very excited to go because it was a meeting at the heart of my interests. There were many awesome sessions and, unfortunately, I could not attend them all.

The first keynote I attended was by [Sian Beilock](https://hpl.uchicago.edu/), a psychologist at the University of Chicago. She discussed the idea of "math anxiety" and how certain people can be afflicted by it. She offers tips to those that "suffer" from it and to educators to help others deal with it. One of the most interesting things she talked about was the idea that kids with a higher math ability were actually most likely to be affected by anxiety. One interpretation is that those with more ability also "care" the most and so are likely to be affected by their internal states. Another interpretation, I suppose, is that those with higher math ability have more "room" to fall from their ability when they are anxious than "lower ability" students. Another idea she discussed is that elementary school teachers, who are mostly female, tend to have the highest levels of math anxiety, which in turn affects female students, while male students are affected to a lower extent. One of the interventions she suggests is to simply have students write about their feelings of anxiety before taking an exam. Her work has shown that this leads to a decrease in the number of errors and an increase in performance. This seems to be a "low-cost" and fairly easy implementation to make.
